# Modeling-the-Neutral-Hydrogen-Profile

### Introduction

Modeling the distribution of atomic hydrogen in Earth’s exosphere proves to be
a difficult task due to the dynamics of the Earth’s atmosphere. However, one of
the most crucial observations that can be made from the ground are the Balmer α
and Balmer β intensities of hydrogen. Balmer α is produced when a Lyman β
photon from the Sun excites a neutral hydrogen atom from the first shell to the
third shell. From there, the electron de-excites to the second shell and produces a
photon corresponding to Balmer α. Furthermore, Balmer β is produced in a
similar fashion by a Lyman γ photon and a transition from the fourth shell to the
second shell. By comparing current data of emissions of these lines to the
intensity outputs by the lyao_rt code generated by James Bishop, the forward
modeling technique can be used to determine the best hydrogen density profile.
The source file for the lyao_rt code, which is the neutral hydrogen density
profile for Earth’s atmosphere, is generated by the MSIS-90 thermosphere
model.

### MSIS-90 Thermosphere Model

The MSIS-90 thermosphere model generates the atomic hydrogen number
density for exospheric altitudes by modifying the model for higher altitudes
through Bishop. MSIS-90 requires specific parameters in order to determine
this hydrogen profile such as day of year, universal time of evaluation, apparent
solar local time, solar F_10.7 index for date of evaluation, and 81-day average
of solar F_10.7 index

### LYAO_RT Code

The lyao_rt code models exospheric atomic hydrogen and helium emissions,
which is particularly useful for the forward-modeling technique. The lyao_rt
code solves the integral form of the transport equation while considering the
chance of singly vs multi-scattering of the Lyman β or γ photons when
interacting with the neutral hydrogen. Specifically, Bishop’s code uses a
parameter referred to as the re-emission branching ratio. For example, a
hydrogen atom excited into the third state by Lyman β will re-emit as a Lyman
β phton 88.2% of the time and emit as Balmer α 11.8% of the time. The code
then outputs the intensities for both Balmer α and Balmer β which can then be
plotted against the shadow altitude. In addition, the code also outputs the
intensities from singly-scattered and multi-scattered methods

### Discussion and Conclusion

The plots that can be seen in the Results section provide some insight and
analysis that can take place for both the Balmer α and Balmer β emissions,
which are listed below:

• The intensity of Balmer α and Balmer β emissions decreases as the shadow
altitude increases. This agrees with Figure 1 which shows that the number
density of neutral hydrogen in the exosphere decreases with increasing
altitude. Therefore, there are less atoms in the higher shadow altitudes to
produce these emissions.

• Furthermore, the intensity of Balmer α is greater than that of Balmer β. This
is expected since the Sun produces a greater amount of Lyman β (the photon
that can produce the emission of Balmer α) than Lyman γ (the photon that
produces the emission of Balmer β).

• Most of the emissions for both Balmer β and Balmer α stem from the single
scattered state rather than the multiple scattered state. 

### References

• Bishop, J. “Thermospheric Atomic Hydrogen Densities and Fluxes from
Dayside Lyman /α Measurements.” NASA/ADS, 2001,
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2001JASTP..63..331B/abstract.

• Bishop, J. “Transport of Resonant Atomic Hydrogen Emissions in the
Thermosphere and Geocorona: Model Description and Applications.”
NASA/ADS, 1999,
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999JQSRT..61..473B/abstract

### Acknowledgements

I would like to express my sincerest thanks to both Dr. Mierkiewicz and Dr.
Aufdenberg. Dr. Mierkiewicz’s undying support and willingness to become my
mentor proves his commitment to his students. Dr. Aufdenberg’s push of
conversation and a welcoming learning environment allowed me to prosper as
a student. Lastly, Joseph Michael Hammill’s continuous encouragement aided
my development as a researcher. 
